[e.txt]

In 1974 scientists warned that certain industrial chemicals, e.g., chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs) and to a lesser extent, halons and carbon tetrachloride, could migrate to the
stratosphere. There, sunlight could free the chlorine or bromine atoms to form chlorine
monoxide or other chemicals, which would deplete upper-atmospheric ozone. A seasonal
decrease, or "hole," discovered in 1985 in the ozone layer above Antarctica was the first
confirmation of a thinning of the layer. The hole occurs over Antarctica because the freezing
helps the very high clouds characteristic of that area form tiny ice particles of water and
nitric acid, which facilitate the chemical reactions involved. In addition, the polar winds,
which follow a swirling pattern, create a confined vortex, trapping the chemicals. When the
Antarctic sun rises in August or September and hits the trapped chemicals, a chain reaction
begins in which chlorine, bromine (from the halons), and ice crystals react with the ozone
and destroy it very quickly. The effect usually lasts through November. There is a corresponding
hole over the Arctic that similarly appears in the spring, although in some years warmer
winters there do not result in a major depletion of the ozone layer. A global thinning of
the ozone layer results as ozone-rich air from the remaining ozone layer flows into the ozone-poor areas.

Minimum ozone levels in the Antarctic decreased steadily throughout the 1990s, and less dramatic
decreases have been found above other areas of the world. In 2000 (and again in 2003) the
hole reached a record size, extending over 10.8 million sq mi (28 million sq km), an area
greater than that of North America. In 1987 an international agreement, the Montreal Protocol,
was reached on reducing the production of ozone-depleting compounds. Revisions in 1992 called
for an end to the production of the worst of such compounds by 1996, and CFC emissions dropped
dramatically by 1993. Recovery of the ozone layer, however, is expected to take 50 to 100 years.
Damage to the ozone layer can also be caused by sulfuric acid droplets produced by volcanic eruptions.